Updating the Provider governance docs based on AIP-95 (#60896)
mistercrunch/Airflow: PROVIDERS.rst

   `Managing provider's lifecycle <https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/providers/MANAGING_PROVIDERS_LIFECYCLE.rst>`_

Provider Governance Framework
-----------------------------

This section describes the governance framework for community providers, including lifecycle stages,
stewardship model, and quantitative health metrics.

Airflow's success is built on its extensive ecosystem of community-supported integrations—over 1,600
hooks, operators, and sensors released as part of 90+ provider packages. These integrations are critical
for "ubiquitous orchestration." This governance framework establishes a scalable method to grow the

> number of integrations while ensuring quality. All governance remains with the Airflow PMC.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
number of integrations while ensuring quality. Actual code acceptance and release governance remains with the Airflow PMC.
```

I think ASF and our rules do not require governance of things like structure, code conventions, patterns within the provider. While PMC has exclusive governance on making a release. This is the legal act of Foundation that is important, and where we need to be strict. But I think it's quite ok to delegate decisions on the "provider-specific" choices on conventions/structures etc. as long as they follow some general architectural choices of Airflow. We have good precence in Google, Amazon. Teradata and other providers. where the PMC hardly makes decisions on approvals/conventions etc.,but it's cruscial we review and accept the code and release it.

Provider Stewardship Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Each provider or integration component must have designated **stewards** responsible for ensuring

Reviewer 2: How is it going to work for existing providers? Are we going to nominate stewards ad-hoc, or is it going to be applied only for new providers?
If it's only for new providers, it's better to mention that it applies only for providers created after the approval of AIP-95 on Dec. 10, 2025.
Otherwise, we might need a further discussion of how existing providers will adapt - because it's not that clear from the AIP.

Reviewer 3: Yeah for new providers

Author: yes, added an explicit comment in the doc in managing provider lifecycle

Reviewer: > How is it going to work for existing providers? Are we going to nominate stewards ad-hoc, or is it going to be applied only for new providers?
If it's only for new providers, it's better to mention that it applies only for providers created after the approval of AIP-95 on Dec. 10, 2025.
Otherwise, we might need a further discussion of how existing providers will adapt - because it's not that clear from the AIP.

I think the best approach for that - is that we are going to make a call for stewards. I bet there will be some obvious (Google and AWS for example) and less obvious people responding to stewardship call. The remaining ones will be PMC stewarded - and I think once we slowly start rolling thing we will also make some review and analysis of existing providers  - and we will  make individual decisions for them.

the health criteria described below are met:

* **Minimum stewards**: At least two unique individuals must serve as stewards for each provider
* **Role definition**: Stewards are subject matter experts for the integration (service, language,

>   or skill). Stewardship is a responsibility, not an additional authority or privilege

Reviewer 2: nit: the comment in paranthesis looks a bit out of context
```suggestion
* **Role definition**: Stewards are subject matter experts for the integration. Stewardship is a responsibility, not an additional authority or privilege
```

Author: Reworded and expanded to address feedback. Good catch!

* **Committer sponsorship**: Each steward must be sponsored by an existing Airflow Committer who
  ensures stewards fulfill their responsibilities. The sponsor is responsible for guiding the stewards
  through the process of maintaining the provider, following best practices including regular dependency

>   updates, issue resolution, and ensuring the provider meets the health metrics described below. The sponsor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  updates, issue resolution, and monitoring whether the provider meets the health metrics described below. The sponsor
```

I think it will be difficult for the sponsor to "ensure" the provider meets help metrics.

Author: good catch, done

>   is NOT responsible for the codebase itself, which remains the responsibility of the stewards.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Committer sponsorship**: Each steward must be sponsored by an existing Airflow Committer. The
sponsor ensures that stewards fulfill their responsibilities and provides guidance on maintaining the
provider according to best practices. This includes regular dependency updates, issue resolution, and
ensuring the provider meets the health metrics required for its current lifecycle stage (that is, incubation
or production). The sponsor is NOT responsible for the provider’s codebase, which remains the
responsibility of the stewards.
```

>   is NOT responsible for the codebase itself, which remains the responsibility of the stewards.

Reviewer 3: The sponsorship model here says "Each steward must be sponsored" but later in the "Prerequisites" section (line 278) it says "At least one existing Airflow Committer willing to sponsor the stewards" (plural, implying one sponsor for all). The [AIP-95 text](https://cwiki.apache.org/confluence/display/AIRFLOW/AIP-95+Provider+lifecycle+update+proposal) states: "each Steward is sponsored by an existing Airflow committer." Consider making this consistent throughout: either one sponsor per steward or clarify that one committer can sponsor multiple stewards.

Author: made it explicit and consistent now (I think)

>   is NOT responsible for the codebase itself, which remains the responsibility of the stewards.

Reviewer 2: ```
  is NOT responsible for the codebase itself, which remains the responsibility of the stewards.
```
I feel a bit uncomfortable about the wording - if a committer merges a PR to the codebase, they should have some responsibility to ensure that the PR is technically ok (e.g., CI passes succesfully, no potential security concerns, etc.) - even if a steward approves it. 
I'd adopt the relevant definitions from the i18n "[code owner](https://github.com/apache/airflow/tree/main/airflow-core/src/airflow/ui/public/i18n#42-code-owner)".

Reviewer 3: Fair point around ensuring it meets standard and maybe it needs rephrasing to say "active maintenance" remains the responsibility of stewards

Author: fair, added

Reviewer: Also - I think what is already mentioned below, is that committers are ultimately accountable for **any** code merged, sponsors are really there so that stewards should expect that at least the sponsors will pay attention.

> * **Accountability**: Ultimate accountability remains with the Airflow PMC and Committers

Reviewer 2: The sentence about the "Accountability" is quite vague

Author: Actually, that is deliberate at this time. Can expand more as needed and as we get experience with the model

Reviewer: I think it's good to say it in this way - "accountability" is precisely what "merging" permission gives. Those who merge PRs are accountable for what they merge - in a number of ways (including their ICLA being attached to the commit merge effectively)

> * **Transitions**: Neither sponsorship nor stewardship are roles in perpetuity—they can be

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* **Transitions**: Neither sponsorship nor stewardship are roles in perpetuity; they can be
```

  transitioned to others based on mutual agreement and PMC approval

.. note::

   The quantitative criteria described below are aspirational. The PMC will revisit these metrics

>    based on actual experience 6 months after they are established and published.

Reviewer 3: This accurately reflects the AIP-95 language though should we consider specifying when the 6-month review period starts (e.g., "from when this governance framework is officially adopted" or "from the date of first quarterly review") for clarity.

Author: made it explicit from first quarterly review

   * - Contributors
     - At least 5 unique individuals making contributions (code or documentation) in the last 6 months
   * - Issue resolution rate
     - At least 60% of reported issues closed within 90 days
   * - Security/release issues
     - All release and security related issues closed within 30 days
   * - Feature releases
     - At least 1 feature release every 6 months
   * - User engagement
     - Maintain support activity with response to questions within 2 weeks on average
   * - Governance participation
     - Demonstrated participation in project governance channels including quarterly updates

**Attic / Deprecation Stage**

Modules should be moved into the Attic when relevance wanes, typically measured by declining
activity. This commonly occurs when the integrated solution has faded in popularity and is replaced
by more modern alternatives.

Movement to the Attic must be communicated on the dev list and voted on by the PMC. Exceptions can
be granted based on the vote.

Quantitative criteria triggering attic consideration:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 40 60

   * - Metric
     - Threshold
   * - PRs submitted

>      - Fewer than 5 PRs in the last 6 months

Reviewer 5: In the recent months I noticed we had a lot of "refactoring" PRs where individuals ran over the codebase to shuffle imports to SDK, fixed mypy, made SQLA2 adjustments, NOTICE file changes due to year change, minimum Airflow version bump... Also minor fixes if dependency conflicts. Do these "maintenance" activities count-in as well? Because then most likely all have at least 5 in the last 6 months.

Reviewer 3: I don't think they should count

Author: I agree that I don't think it should count either. 
Just need to make sure that our metrics and dashboard can cleanly deal with it though.

   * - PR review time
     - PRs not being reviewed in more than a month
   * - Issues reported
     - Fewer than 10 unique issues filed in the last 6 months
   * - Contributors
     - Fewer than 3 unique individuals making contributions (code or documentation) in the last 6 months
   * - Issue resolution rate
     - Less than 30% of reported issues closed within 90 days
   * - Security/release issues
     - Release and security related issues not getting closed within 30 days
   * - Feature releases
     - No feature releases in the last 6 months

Consequences of attic status:

* Modules remain readable but do not receive active maintenance

> * After a period of at least 6 months in the attic, modules can be chosen for removal with

Reviewer 2: I think that it would be great if this state can also be also reversible - ideally we won't get there at all, but recovering from attic should be easier for all sides rather than going through the incubation process all over again

Reviewer 3: Oh yea, absolutely it could be reversible as long as there is a strong backing and some confidence that it will be maintained actively this time

Author: agreed and added

>   appropriate communication (see `Removing community providers`_ below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  appropriate communication (see `Removing community providers`_ below)
* Module is not actively tested in "main"  in Airflow CI , it's dependencies are not checked for conflicts with other main providers, and common refactorings are not applied to it.
```

Author: added

>   appropriate communication (see `Removing community providers`_ below)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  appropriate communication (see `Removing community providers`_ below)
* Module is not actively tested in "main"  in Airflow CI , it's dependencies are not checked for conflicts with other main providers, and common refactorings are not applied to it.
* signifcant effort might be needed to restore such provider from the attic phase and it is expected
  that steward signing up for the stewardship will make the efforts to bring such provider from the attic.
```

Author: added below

**Mature Providers**

Some providers may have very stable interfaces requiring minimal changes on a regular basis (e.g.,

> Slack provider integration). At the discretion of the Airflow PMC, certain providers can be tagged

Reviewer 5: Should we maybe be a bit more vendor neutral and use `http`as example?
```suggestion
HTTP provider integration). At the discretion of the Airflow PMC, certain providers can be tagged
```

as **"mature providers"**, which will not automatically be deprecated and moved into the attic due
to lack of activity alone.

Periodic Reviews
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Airflow PMC is responsible for reviewing the health status of integrations on a **quarterly
basis** and making decisions such as:

* Graduating providers from incubation to production
* Moving providers from production to the attic
* Granting exceptions for specific providers

These discussions will be held in public and subsequently summarized and shared on the Airflow devlist.

Accepting new community providers
---------------------------------

The Airflow community welcomes new provider contributions. All new providers enter through the
**Incubation** stage (unless specifically accelerated by the PMC) to ensure alignment with ASF
guidelines and community principles.

**Prerequisites for proposing a new provider:**

1. **Working codebase**: A functional implementation demonstrating the integration
2. **Stewardship commitment**: At least two individuals willing to serve as stewards

> 3. **Committer sponsorship**: At least one existing Airflow Committer willing to sponsor the stewards

Reviewer 5: Inconsistent: Above you wrote one committer per steward. I think one per provider is sufficient as described here. Not sure though what was VOTEd on.

Author: resolved by making it explicit and consistent now

This section describes the governance framework for community providers, including lifecycle stages,
stewardship model, and quantitative health metrics.

Airflow's success is built on its extensive ecosystem of community-supported integrations—over 1,600
hooks, operators, and sensors released as part of 90+ provider packages. These integrations are critical
for "ubiquitous orchestration." This governance framework establishes a scalable method to grow the
number of integrations while ensuring quality. Actual code acceptance and release governance remains with the Airflow PMC.

Provider Stewardship Model
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Each provider or integration component must have designated **stewards** responsible for ensuring
the health criteria described below are met:

* **Minimum stewards**: At least two unique individuals must serve as stewards for each provider
* **Role definition**: Stewards are subject matter experts for the integration. This could be expertise in the
  service being integrated, the language being supported by the provider, or the framework being integrated.
  Stewardship is a responsibility, not an additional authority or privilege

> * **Committer sponsorship**: Each steward must be sponsored by an existing Airflow Committer. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Committer sponsorship**: Each steward must be sponsored by at least one Airflow Committer. The
```

  sponsor ensures that stewards fulfill their responsibilities and provides guidance on maintaining the
  provider according to best practices. This includes regular dependency updates, issue resolution, and
  monitoring that the provider meets the health metrics required for its current lifecycle stage (that is, incubation
  or production). The sponsor is responsible for PR reviews and merges (including ensuring coding standards are met), but

>   is NOT responsible for active maintenance of the provider's codebase, which remains the responsibility of the stewards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is NOT responsible for active maintenance of the provider's codebase, which remains the responsibility of the stewards.
  While sponsors should be accountable when it comes to reviews and merges, it's also OK and welcome that other committers merge code providing it fulfill the criteria.
```

Reviewer: I think it's important to say it explicitly otherwise other committers might refrain from merging PRs for a given provider.

Author: Fair point, good catch.
